Update broken link (#5609)
okta/okta-developer-docs: packages/@okta/vuepress-site/docs/reference/api/authn/index.md

# Authentication API

The Okta Authentication API provides operations to authenticate users, perform multifactor enrollment and verification, recover forgotten passwords, and unlock accounts. It can be used as a standalone API to provide the identity layer on top of your existing application. Or it can be integrated with the Okta [Sessions API](https://developer.okta.com/docs/api/openapi/okta-management/management/tag/Session/) to obtain an Okta [session cookie](/docs/guides/session-cookie/) and access apps within Okta.

> The API is targeted for developers who want to build their own end-to-end login experience. Developers can build their own login experience to replace the built-in Okta login experience and addresses the following key scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API is targeted for developers who want to build their own end-to-end sign-in experience. Developers can build their own sign-in experience to replace the built-in Okta login experience and addresses the following key scenarios:
```

* **Primary authentication** allows you to verify the username and password credentials for a user.

> * **Multifactor authentication** (MFA) strengthens the security of password-based authentication by requiring additional verification of another Factor. For example, in addition to a password, MFA can require a temporary one-time passcode or an SMS passcode. The Authentication API supports user enrollment with MFA factors enabled by the administrator, and MFA challenges based on your global session policy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Multifactor authentication** (MFA) strengthens the security of password-based authentication by requiring additional verification of another Factor. For example, in addition to a password, MFA can require a temporary one-time passcode or an SMS passcode. The Authentication API supports user enrollment with MFA factors enabled by the admin, and MFA challenges based on your global session policy.
```

> * **Recovery** allows users to securely reset their password if they've forgotten it, or unlock their account if they're locked out due to excessive failed login attempts. This functionality is subject to the security policy set by the administrator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Recovery** allows users to securely reset their password if they've forgotten it, or unlock their account if they're locked out due to excessive failed sign-in attempts. This functionality is subject to the security policy set by the admin.
```

## Application types

> The behavior of the Okta Authentication API varies depending on the type of your app and your org's security policies. For example, your org's global session policy, the MFA Enrollment Policy, or the Password Policy can affect the behavior of the API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The behavior of the Okta Authentication API varies depending on the type of your app and your org's security policies. For example, your org's global session policy, the MFA enrollment policy, or the password policy can affect the behavior of the API.
```

Author: Going to avoid lowercasing these key terms if possible. It would be a large effort to standardize the capitalization across the whole doc.

> **Note:** Policy evaluation is conditional on the [client request context](https://developer.okta.com/docs/api/#client-request-context) such as IP address.

> **Note:** In Identity Engine, the Multifactor (MFA) enrollment policy name has changed to [authenticator enrollment policy](/docs/reference/api/policy/#authenticator-enrollment-policy).

### Public application

A public app is an app that anonymously starts an authentication or recovery transaction without an API token, such as the [Okta Sign-In Widget](/docs/guides/embedded-siw/). Public applications are aggressively rate-limited to prevent abuse and require primary authentication to be successfully completed before releasing any metadata about a user.

> ### Trusted application

Author: Going to avoid changing headings as they can be saved and referenced elsewhere in our docs and could create broken links

<ApiOperation method="post" url="/api/v1/authn" />

> Every authentication transaction starts with primary authentication that validates a user's primary password credential. **Password Policy**, **MFA Policy**, and **sign-on policy** are evaluated during primary authentication. They're evaluated to determine if the user's password is expired, a Factor should be enrolled, or additional verification is required. The [transaction state](#transaction-state) of the response depends on the user status, group memberships, and assigned policies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every authentication transaction starts with primary authentication that validates a user's primary password credential. The password, MFA, and sign-on policies are evaluated during primary authentication. They're evaluated to determine if the user's password is expired, a factor should be enrolled, or additional verification is required. The [transaction state](#transaction-state) of the response depends on the user status, group memberships, and assigned policies.
```

> > **Note:** In Identity Engine, the MFA Enrollment Policy name has changed to [authenticator enrollment policy](/docs/reference/api/policy/#authenticator-enrollment-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** In Identity Engine, the MFA enrollment policy is called the [authenticator enrollment policy](/docs/reference/api/policy/#authenticator-enrollment-policy).
```

The requests and responses vary depending on the app type, and whether a password expiration warning is sent:

* [Primary Authentication with public applications](#primary-authentication-with-public-applications)&mdash;[Request Example](#request-example-for-primary-authentication-with-public-applications)
* [Primary Authentication with trusted applications](#primary-authentication-with-trusted-applications)&mdash;[Request Example](#request-example-for-trusted-applications)
* [Primary Authentication with activation tokens](#primary-authentication-with-activation-tokens)&mdash;[Request Example](#request-example-for-activation-tokens)
* [Primary Authentication with device fingerprinting](#primary-authentication-with-device-fingerprinting)&mdash;[Request Example](#request-example-for-device-fingerprinting)
* [Primary Authentication with password expiration warning](#primary-authentication-with-password-expiration-warning)&mdash;[Request Example](#request-example-for-password-expiration-warning)

> > **Note:** Enable MFA factors and assign a valid sign-on policy to a user before you enroll and/or verify an MFA Factor during authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Enable MFA factors and assign a valid sign-on policy to a user before you enroll and/or verify an MFA factor during authentication.
```

> **Note:**
>

> > * Overriding context, such as `deviceToken`, is a highly privileged operation limited to trusted web applications. This requires the app to use a valid administrator API token when making authentication or recovery requests. If an API token isn't provided, the `deviceToken` is ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * Overriding context, such as `deviceToken`, is a highly privileged operation limited to trusted web apps. This requires the app to use a valid admin API token when making authentication or recovery requests. If an API token isn't provided, the `deviceToken` is ignored.
```

>

> > * Authentication requests that include a Factor challenge with a per-device or per-session sign-on policy must always include the same `deviceToken` for the user. If the `deviceToken` is absent or doesn’t match the previous `deviceToken`, Okta issues a challenge with every authentication attempt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> * Authentication requests that include a factor challenge with a per-device or per-session sign-on policy must always include the same `deviceToken` for the user. If the `deviceToken` is absent or doesn’t match the previous `deviceToken`, Okta issues a challenge with every authentication attempt.
```

> **Note:** The use of the `X-Device-Fingerprint` header for new device security Behavior Detection is deprecated. Starting April 12 2021, Okta enabled [improvements to the new device security behavior](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?id=csh-improved-ndbd) for all the existing tenants. New device security behavior only relies on the `deviceToken` in the [Context Object](#context-object) and doesn't rely on the `X-Device-Fingerprint` header. The new or unknown device email notification feature continues to rely on the `X-Device-Fingerprint` header.

> Specifying your own device fingerprint in the `X-Device-Fingerprint` header is a highly privileged operation that is limited to trusted web applications and requires making authentication requests with a valid API token. Send the device fingerprint only if the trusted app has a computed fingerprint for the end user's client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifying your own device fingerprint in the `X-Device-Fingerprint` header is a highly privileged operation that is limited to trusted web apps and requires making authentication requests with a valid API token. Send the device fingerprint only if the trusted app has a computed fingerprint for the end user's client.
```

##### Response example for Factor enroll for step-up authentication with Okta session

> The user is assigned to an MFA Policy that requires enrollment during the sign-in process. They must [select a Factor to enroll](#enroll-factor) to complete the authentication transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user is assigned to an MFA policy that requires enrollment during the sign-in process. They must [select a factor to enroll](#enroll-factor) to complete the authentication transaction.
```

##### Response example for Factor enroll

> The user is assigned to an MFA Policy that requires enrollment during the sign-in process. They must [select a Factor to enroll](#enroll-factor) to complete the authentication transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The user is assigned to an MFA policy that requires enrollment during the sign-in process. They must [select a factor to enroll](#enroll-factor) to complete the authentication transaction.
```

> > **Note:** In Identity Engine, the MFA Enrollment Policy name has changed to [authenticator enrollment policy](/docs/reference/api/policy/#authenticator-enrollment-policy).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** In Identity Engine, the MFA enrollment policy is called the [authenticator enrollment policy](/docs/reference/api/policy/#authenticator-enrollment-policy).
```

#### Enroll Custom HOTP Factor

> Enrollment through the Authentication API isn’t supported for Custom HOTP Factors. Refer to the [Factors API documentation](/docs/reference/api/factors/#enroll-custom-hotp-factor) if you would like to enroll users for this type of Factor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enrollment through the Authentication API isn't supported for custom HOTP factors. See the [Factors API documentation](/docs/reference/api/factors/#enroll-custom-hotp-factor) if you would like to enroll users for this type of factor.
```

##### Send activation links

Sends an activation email or SMS when the user is unable to scan the QR Code provided as part of an Okta Verify transaction.

> If the user can't scan the QR Code, they can use the link provided in email or SMS to complete the transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the user can't scan the QR Code, they can use the link that's provided in email or SMS to complete the transaction.
```

* [Verify U2F Factor](#verify-u2f-factor)
* [Verify WebAuthn Factor](#verify-webauthn-factor)

> > **Note:** If the sign-on (or app sign-on) [policy](#remember-device-policy-object) allows remembering the device, then the end user can choose whether the current device is remembered. This helps reduce the number of times the user is prompted for MFA on the current device. The user's choice can be passed to Okta using the request parameter `rememberDevice` to the verify endpoint. The default value of `rememberDevice` parameter is `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If the sign-on (or app sign-on) [policy](#remember-device-policy-object) allows remembering the device, then the end user can choose if Okta should remember the current device. This helps reduce the number of times the user is prompted for MFA on the current device. The user's choice can be passed to Okta using the request parameter `rememberDevice` to the verify endpoint. The default value of `rememberDevice` parameter is `false`.
```

##### Response example (waiting for 3-number verification challenge response)

> > **Note:** If Okta detects an unusual sign-in attempt, the end user receives a 3-number verification challenge. The correct answer of the challenge is provided in the polling response. This is similar to the standard `waiting` response but with the addition of a `correctAnswer` property in the `challenge` object. The `correctAnswer` property is only be included in the response if the end user is on the 3-number verification challenge view in the Okta Verify mobile app. Look at [Push notification and number challenge](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?id=csh-okta-verify-number-challenge-v1) for more details about this challenge flow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** If Okta detects an unusual sign-in attempt, the end user receives a three-number verification challenge. The correct answer of the challenge is provided in the polling response. This is similar to the standard `waiting` response but with the addition of a `correctAnswer` property in the `challenge` object. The `correctAnswer` property is only be included in the response if the end user is on the three-number verification challenge view in the Okta Verify mobile app. Look at [Push notification and number challenge](https://help.okta.com/okta_help.htm?id=csh-okta-verify-number-challenge-v1) for more details about this challenge flow.
```

<ApiOperation method="post" url="/api/v1/authn/factors/${factorId}/verify" /> <SupportsCors />

> **Note:** The `appId` property in Okta U2F enroll/verify API response is the [origin](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc6454.txt) of

> the web page that triggers the API request (assuming the origin has been configured to be trusted by Okta). According to the [FIDO spec](https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-u2f-v1.2-ps-20170411/fido-appid-and-facets-v1.2-ps-20170411.html#h2_the-appid-and-facetid-assertions), enroll and verify U2F device with `appId`s in different DNS zone isn’t allowed. For example, if a user enrolled a U2F device through the Okta Sign-In Widget that is hosted at `https://login.company.com`, while the user can verify the U2F Factor from `https://login.company.com`, the user wouldn’t be able to verify it from the Okta portal `https://company.okta.com`, and the U2F device would return error code 4 - `DEVICE_INELIGIBLE`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the web page that triggers the API request (assuming the origin has been configured to be trusted by Okta). According to the [FIDO spec](https://fidoalliance.org/specs/fido-u2f-v1.2-ps-20170411/fido-appid-and-facets-v1.2-ps-20170411.html#h2_the-appid-and-facetid-assertions), enroll and verify U2F device with `appId`s in different DNS zone isn’t allowed. For example, if a user enrolled a U2F device through the Okta Sign-In Widget that is hosted at `https://login.company.com`, while the user can verify the U2F factor from `https://login.company.com`, the user wouldn’t be able to verify it from the Okta portal `https://company.okta.com`, and the U2F device would return error code 4 - `DEVICE_INELIGIBLE`.
```

##### Start verification to get challenge nonce

> Verification of the U2F Factor starts with getting the challenge nonce and U2F token details. And then you use the client-side

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verification of the U2F factor starts with getting the challenge nonce and U2F token details. And then you use the client-side
```

JavaScript API to get the signed assertion from the U2F token.

> ##### Request example for verify U2F Factor

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Request example for verify U2F factor
```

##### Start verification to get challenge nonce

> Verification of the WebAuthn Factor starts with getting the WebAuthn credential request details (including the challenge nonce). And then you use the client-side JavaScript API to get the signed assertion from the WebAuthn authenticator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verification of the WebAuthn factor starts with getting the WebAuthn credential request details (including the challenge nonce). Then you use the client-side JavaScript API to get the signed assertion from the WebAuthn authenticator.
```

Starts a new password recovery transaction for the email Factor:

* Specify a user identifier (`username`) but no password in the request.
* If the request is successful, Okta sends a recovery email asynchronously to the user's primary and secondary email address with a [recovery token](#recovery-token). The user can then complete the transaction.

Primary authentication of a user's recovery credential (for example: `EMAIL` or `SMS`) hasn't completed when this request is sent. The user is pending validation.

Okta provides security in the following ways:

* Since the recovery email is distributed out-of-band and may be viewed on a different user agent or device, this operation doesn’t return a [state token](#state-token) and doesn’t have a `next` link.

> * Okta doesn't publish other metadata about the user until primary authentication has been successfully completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Okta doesn't publish other metadata about the user until primary authentication is successfully completed.
```

Starts a new password recovery transaction with a user identifier (`username`) and asynchronously sends an SMS OTP (challenge) to the user's mobile phone. This operation transitions the recovery transaction to the `RECOVERY_CHALLENGE` state and wait for the user to [verify the OTP](#verify-sms-recovery-factor).

> **Note:** Primary authentication of a user's recovery credential (for example: email or SMS) hasn't yet completed. Okta doesn't publish other metadata about the user until primary authentication has been successfully completed.

> > **Note:** SMS recovery Factor must be enabled through the user's assigned password policy to use this operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** The SMS recovery factor must be enabled through the user's assigned password policy to use this operation.
```

#### Forgot password with trusted application

Allows a [trusted app](#trusted-application) such as an external portal to implement its own primary authentication process. The trusted app can directly obtain a [recovery token](#recovery-token) for a user given just the user's identifier.

> > **Note:** Directly obtaining a `recoveryToken` is a highly privileged operation that requires an administrator API token. Okta recommends that you restrict that operation to trusted web applications. Anyone that obtains a `recoveryToken` for a user and knows the answer to a user's recovery question can reset their password or unlock their account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **Note:** Directly obtaining a `recoveryToken` is a highly privileged operation that requires an admin API token. Okta recommends that you restrict that operation to trusted web apps. Anyone that obtains a `recoveryToken` for a user and knows the answer to a user's recovery question can reset their password or unlock their account.
```

**Notes:**

* Primary authentication of a user's recovery credential (e.g `EMAIL` or `SMS`) hasn't yet completed.

> * Okta doesn't publish other metadata about the user until primary authentication has been successfully completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Okta doesn't publish other metadata about the user until primary authentication is successfully completed.
```
